Once around Kalisto. So Kalisto is the
fourth of the Galilean moons of Jupiter
discovered by Galileo. Actually there
was a astronomer called Marius that also
discovered the moons of Jupiter in the
same year 1610.
Um but nowadays we have this fantastic
image of the surface of Kalisto. very
dark in color but peppered with the
lighter features which are impact
craters.
The
fact that this has these impact craters
and is accumulating more and more over
time points to a very very ancient
surface between 2 and 4 billion years
old. And that is because we think that
there has been no significant geological
activity on the surface. No volcanoes,
no glacia flowing around to erase older
craters for about the last two billion
or maybe more years because this is
largely geologically dead, just getting
continuously peppered by more and more
of these impacts bringing fresh material
up to the surface. It's the second
largest of Jupiter's moons, 4,820
kilometers in diameter. Uh that's a
decent planet-sized object really about
2% the mass of the Earth but with a
comparatively low density. It's actually
a lower density than any of the other
moons of Jupiter, suggesting that this
lower temperature, less active surface,
a greater distance away from Jupiter
where there's less radiation, less
energy, less heat flow, and so on is
allowing it to retain
much much more of the volatile ices, the
water, uh the methane, the ammonia,
those sorts of compounds.
rather than the rock, metal, sulfur,
carbon, denser materials that seem to be
prevalent on the other moons.
Here's a little map of the orbit with
the moons animating around. So, you can
see Kalisto in the pale blue color
orbiting around outside the realm of the
other three and Jupiter, the green in
the center there. takes 16.7 days to go
round, which is not an integer multiple
of the orbital period of any of its
sister moons. Those sister moons are in
a one to two to four relationship and
that keeps them in a stable situation,
but it makes their orbits elliptical and
creates tidal heating within them,
keeping their cores much warmer than you
would expect otherwise. With of course
the greatest effect being on Io whizzing
around nearest Jupiter, medium effect on
Europa, and then a little bit of an
effect on Ganymede. But Kalisto is so
far away and not in any sort of integer
relationship. Doesn't keep getting the
same kick from the other moons that it
doesn't really get much by way of
internal heating. Now in the distant
future around about 1.5 billion years
from now that's likely to change. It
will gradually fall into a 1 to 2 to 4
to 8 relationship and be part of this
cosmic dance. And it might then start to
get a little bit warmed up by the
internal heat of friction through being
stretched and squished. But it's such a
long way from Jupiter that uh that won't
be anywhere near as much as occurs for
the others. It's a large moon. It's
larger than our moon. This is the Earth,
the Moon, and Kalisto to scale here. Um
and that's uh large enough to be about
the same size as the planet Mercury in
fact. So we would call this a planet if
it was orbiting around the sun, but of
course it orbits Jupiter.
All those craters are unwrapped here and
the whole surface has been kind of
expanded and wrapped to show you the
impact structures on the surface just
peppered with a few large craters and
lots and lots of small ones. But if we
zoom in, courtesy of some of our
spacecraft that have done really nice
flybys, we've got a crater to the left
center of the picture there, showing a
nice crater wall with a raised dome in
the center, other older craters. And
then up at the top right, there's the
crater wall of a much larger, more
recent impact. And you can see radiating
out away from that these chains of
grooves and straight lines
moving from the top right down towards
the lower left. That's secondary
cratering from the ejector thrown out by
the larger crater. And we've begin to
discover secondary cratering even on
Earth where impacts through material
sideways and you get this linear feature
of this ejector pattern across the
surface but much better preserved here
on Kalisto because there isn't all that
erosion and geological activity to erase
it.
We can also see these ice peaks and
these two are formations that all seem
to point in one direction. And again,
they are probably the result of ejector
from other impacts on the surface of
Kalisto which have thrown blocks of ice
out that have then essentially gone
splat onto the surface. And I think you
can see how they're kind of arrowshaped
and all pointing back towards the uh
impact site of the main event.
One big feature on the surface of
Kalisto though is the Valhalla impact
structure. There's a central crater
about 360 km in diameter and then ringed
around that going out to almost the
whole diameter in this picture 3,800 km.
You can see these sets of uh rings like
uh ripples in a pond. And this is a
probably a large impact that occurred
somewhere between two and four billion
years ago. But when it did so, it
punched right through the crust and into
the liquid below. It's characteristic of
these sorts of impacts where there is a
liquid
layer beneath the surface that you get
these ripple rings moved outwards away
from the central structure rather than
just a simple
uh impact site. And that is telling us
that this surface was much more um
fluid and not frozen solid as it may
well be today back in the past when this
impact happened. Much more liquid there.
Now, there could be some there still
today, but uh that's um something that
we're still in the process of
researching.
There's a little bit of an atmosphere
and this is a very highly enhanced image
of the atmosphere of Kalisto just with
some oxygen and a little bit of uh
carbon dioxide but very very tenuous
almost a vacuum. When we look at the
spectrum of the surface, we do see that
there is a lot of ice there. And this is
all telling us something in conjunction
with the studies of the magnetic field.
Now, most of that magnetic field is
induced field. So induced by the orbital
motion of Kalisto around Jupiter, still
within the realm of Jupiter's overall
super powerful magnetic field. But the
deflection is telling us that there is
electrical conductivity in the sub
subsurface and that's pointing towards
there being a liquid saltwater ocean
underneath all [snorts] of that ice.
Maybe not as large in terms of depth as
the uh case for the other moons, but
maybe that that is really what is going
on. And so we've got this sort of
picture building up of a rocky metal
core. Then a very very thick layer of
ice in different forms. Cubic ice,
tetraonal ice. Then this saltwater ocean
responsible for that electrically
conducting layer um deflecting the
magnetic field and then ordinary
hexagonal ice on the surface followed by
all of those craters. So not a huge
amount of uh heat flow still. Therefore,
the water is not breaking through to the
surface, but nevertheless could still be
warm enough in the middle to uh reside
there.
And being so far from Jupiter, that
lesser tidal heating, lesser radiation
environment, it could well be that
Kalisto is just the place to put a
rocket fuel factory. Uh we could land on
the surface of Kalisto relatively
easily. the radiation environment
wouldn't be as harsh as the other moons.
Maybe you could mine the ice and uh
therefore get water and split it into
hydrogen and oxygen and make a refueling
station at Kalisto, moon of Jupiter.
Wouldn't that be an interesting thing? I
think that's a long way off in the
future, but it's certainly something
that uh NASA has talked about as a sort
of speculative thing in the dim and
distant future. So that's it. Thank you
very much for listening and we'll see
you on another video.